Welcome back.
The main operation in transformer
is the dot product attention.
You've already seen attention in
the first week of this course.
In this video,
I'll remind you how it works before we
move to more complex attention variants.
Let's dive in.
First I'll introduce the concept
of attention using an example of
a translation task.
Then you'll see some details
about the math behind attention.
To understand what's attention, does
think of the following translation task.
You need to translate
an English sentence to German.
You've seen in previous courses how
to make good word embeddings, so
that's vectors for English and German
words that mean the same or similar.
For instance,
let's consider the example sentence.
I am happy which is translated
into the German equivalent.
So when you have a German word you want
to look at the English sentence and
find all places with similar words.
This is what attention does for you.
In an attention layer, the German
word vectors are called queries.
Because they initiate the look up,
a query is matched against all keys and
each guy gets probability that
it's a match for the query.
For instance, to translate the sentence,
I'm happy to German, you can compare
the word I from English with
the following word I-c-h over here, Ich.
Then you can compare the word
am with the word Ich and
finally you can compare the word
happy with the word Ich.
These queries by keys matrix is
often called attention weights and
it says how much each key
is similar to each query.
For example, the vector of the word Ich
maybe similar to the vector for I and
get zero points its probability,
while it's not very similar to am or
happy, but still a little bit and
get 0.1 probability for both.
In the end, the query gets the sum of the
key vectors waited by the probabilities.
In the example,
the weighted sum of these vectors is 0.8
times the embedding of the word I plus 0.1
times the embedding of the word am plus
0.1 times the embedding of the word happy.
Before you dive into
the concept of attention,
you need to first define three main
matrices, capital Q, which stands for
queries, capital K which stands for Keys
and Capital V, which stands for values.
So understand how to
create these matrices.
Let's consider the phrase in English,
I am happy.
First, the word I is embedded,
to obtain a vector representation that
holds continuous values
which is unique for
every single word as seen
earlier in the course.
By feeding three distinct linear layers,
you get three different vectors for
queries, keys and values.
Then you can do the same for
the word am to output a second vector.
And finally the word happy to get
a third vector and form the queries,
keys and values matrix.
From both the capital Q matrix and
the capital K matrix and
attention model calculates weights or
scores representing
the relative importance of the keys for
a specific query.
These attention weights can be
understood as alignments course
as they come from a dos product.
Additionally, to turn these
weights into probabilities,
a softmax function is required.
Finally, multiplying these
probabilities with the values,
you will then get a weighted sequence,
which is the attention results itself.
Now that you have reviewed
the general idea behind attention,
let me go through the math.
The input to attention are queries,
keys and values.
Often values are the same as keys.
Queries are vectors of dimension T and
there is a number LQ of them.
Keys are vectors of the same dimension
D and there is a number LK of them.
Think of keys as the embeddings
of English words.
And the queries as
the embeddings of German words.
Then D is the dimensionality
of word embeddings.
LQ, the length of the English sentence and
LQ, number of words of the German senses.
So queries are a tensor Q of shape LQ
by D and keys have a shape LK by D.
As I said before, a query Q will
assign each key a probability
that the key K is a match for Q.
You measure the similarity by
taking those products of vectors.
So Q and
K are similar if Q dot K is large.
However, the similarity numbers
do not add up to one, so
they cannot be used as probabilities.
To make them so
and to make attention more focused on
the best matching keys, use the softmax.
So you compute the matrix
of query key probabilities,
often called the attention weights,
just as softmax of between Q&K transpose.
This matrix has shaped LQ by LK.
Each query keeper gets a probability
in the final step you take the values,
which is another matrix of
the same shape as keys.
And often the same as keys, and
we want to get a weighted sum,
weighting each value vi by the probability
that the key ki matches the query.
This can be computed very efficiently
just as matrix multiplication,
we multiply attention weights W sub
S by the values V, and that's it.
And attention mechanism calculates the
dynamic or alignment weights representing
the relative importance of
the inputs in this sequence.
Which are the keys for that particular
outputs, which is the query.
Multiplying the dynamic weights or
the alignments
course with the input sequence the values
will then weight the sequence.
A single context vector can then be
calculated using the sum of weighted
vectors.
Now that you've gone through
the math behind attention and
don't worry if you didn't get all of it at
the first time, it's a tricky operation.
Take a moment to appreciate
the final formula.
Matrix Z is our final results,
which is equal to the attention
function of matrices Q, K and V.
Which equals the softmax of the dot
product between Q and K transpose times V.
And in turn it is equal
to W sub A times V.
So the whole attention operation can
be written in this simple equation
which is the softmax of the dot
product between QK transpose times V.
It is important and very simple.
In practice,
this means that you can compute attention
by performing two matrix multiplications.
Q times K transpose and then by V and
once after softmax operation.
Modern hardware such as GPUs and CPUs
are very fast as matrix multiplication,
which makes attention very fast and
such a great operation to use.
Dot-product Attention is the heart and
soul of transformers.
In general terms, the attention
takes as inputs, queries, keys and
values, which are matrices of embeddings.
Dot-product Attention is composed by
just two matrix multiplications and
the softmax function.
Therefore, you should consider
the use of GPUs and CPUs for
speeding up this process.
Now you understand dot
product attention very well.
In the transformer decoder,
we need an extended version
called the causal attention.
I'll teach you about it in the next video.